<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Libation Bearers</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="the-libation-bearers" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<p>The scene represents the Grave of Agamemnon, a mound of earth in a desolate expanse. The time is afternoon. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pylades</b> in the garb of travellers, with swords at their sides, are discovered. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes’</b> hair is cut short, that of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pylades</b> streams down his back. Both look grim and travel-stained. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> holds a long tress of hair in his hand.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O Warder Hermês of the world beneath,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Son of the Father who is Lord of Death;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Saviour, be thou my saviour; Help in War,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Help me! I am returned from lands afar</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To claim mine own. And on this headland steep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of death, I call my Father o’er the deep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To hearken, to give ear.⁠—Behold, I bring</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out of my poverty one little thing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To adorn thy grave, though who can touch the dead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or wake from sleep that unuplifted head?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet long ago in Phokis, where I lay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With Strophius in the hills, being cast away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In childhood, plundered by mine enemies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And friendless, save for this man, Pylades,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I sware an oath which should for ever set</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In memory those they taught me to forget:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If once I came to manhood, so I sware,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In tresses twain I would divide mine hair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One tress for Inachos river, by whose grace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I live, and one for mourning at this place.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which oath I here fulfil. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He lays the tress of hair upon the upper part of the grave mound.</i> O Herald, lay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before his sight the gift I bring this day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who stood not by to mourn him as he fell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor reached mine arms to bid the dead farewell. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">As he turns, he sees the Libation-Bearers approaching.</i></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ha!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What sight is this? What stricken multitude</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of women here in raiment sable-hued</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Far-gleameth? How shall I interpret it?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath some new death upon my lineage lit?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or is it to my father’s grave they go</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With offerings, to appease the wrath below?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It must be. Surely ’tis Electra there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My sister, moves alone, none like to her</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In sorrow. Zeus, Oh, grant to me this day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My vengeance, and be near me in the fray!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come, Pylades, stand further, till we know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More sure, what means this embassy of woe. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pylades</b> withdraw, as <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</b> with the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b> of women bearing offerings for the Grave enters from the other side.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i4">Driven, yea, driven</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I come: I bear Peace-offering to the dead,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Mine hands as blades that tear, my tresses riven,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">And cheek ploughed red.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But all my years, before this day as after,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Have been fed full with weeping as with bread.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And this dumb cry of linen, as in pain,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Deep rent about my bosom, speaketh plain</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of a life long since wounded, where no laughter</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Sounds nor shall sound again.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i4">Dread, very dread,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And hair upstarting and the wrath that streams</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">From the heart of sleep, have first interpreted</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">What manner of dreams</span>
										<br/>
										<span>This house hath dreamed; a voice of terror, blasting</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">The midnight, up from the inmost place it grew,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Shaking the women’s chambers; and the Seer,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Being sworn of God, made answer, there is here</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Anger of dead men wronged, and hate outlasting</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Death, against them that slew.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i4">Craving to fly that curse</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With graceless gift hither she urgeth me</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">—O Earth, Mother and Nurse!⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span>She whom God hateth. But my spirit fears</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">To speak the word it bears.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>When blood is spilt, how shall a gift set free?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">O hearthstone wet with tears!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O pillars of a house broken in twain!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Without sun, without love,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Murk in the heart thereof and mist above,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">For a lord slain!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i3">The reverence of old years</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Is gone, which not by battle nor by strife,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Stealing through charmèd ears,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Lifted the people’s hearts to love their King;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Gone, yet the land still fears.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For Fortune is a god and rules men’s life.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Who knows the great Wheel’s swing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>How one is smitten swift in the eyes of light;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">For one affliction cries</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Slow from the border of sunset; and one lies</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">In deedless night?</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i3">Has Earth once drunk withal</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The blood of her child, Man, the avenging stain</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Hardens, nor flows again.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A blind pain draweth the slayer, draweth him,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>On, on, till he is filled even to the brim</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With sickness of the soul to atone for all.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i3">The shrine of maidenhood</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Once broken ne’er may be unbroke again.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And where man’s life hath flowed,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>All the world’s rivers in their multitude</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Rolling shall strive in vain</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To clean from a brother’s hand that ancient blood.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i3">For me, God in far days</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Laid hand upon my city, and herded me</span>
										<br/>
										<span>From my old home to the House of Slavery,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Where all is violence, and I needs must praise,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Just or unjust,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The pleasure of them that rule, and speechless hold</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The ache of a heart that rageth in the dust.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Only behind the fold</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of this still veil for a little I hide my face</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And weep for the blind doings of this race,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And secret tears are in my heart, ice-cold.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ye thrallèd women, tirers of the bower,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since ye are with me in this suppliant hour,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your escort giving, give your counsel too.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What speech have I for utterance, when I sue</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With offerings to the dead? What word of love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What prayer to reach my father from above?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“To dear Lord,” shall I say, “due gifts I bear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From loving mistress”⁠ ⁠… when they come from her?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I dare not. And I cannot find the word</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To speak, when offerings like these are poured⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or shall I pray him, as men’s custom is,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To send to them who pay these offices</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Requital due⁠ ⁠… for murder and for pride?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or, as in silence and in shame he died,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In shame and silence shall I pour this urn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of offering to the dust, and pouring turn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As men cast out some foulness they abhor,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fling the cup, and fly, and look no more?</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Share with me, Friends, this burden of strange thought.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One hate doth make us one. Oh, hide not aught</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For fear of what may fall us! Destiny</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Waiteth alike for them that men call free,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And them by others mastered. At thine ease</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Speak, if thou knowest of wiser words than these.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>As at God’s altar, since so fain thou art,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before this Tomb I will unveil my heart.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Speak, by his grave and in the fear thereof.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Pray as thou pourest: To all hearts of love⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And who is such of all around us, who?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thyself, and whoso hates Aigisthos true.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>For thee and me alone am I to pray?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ask thine own understanding. It will say.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who else? What heart that with our sorrow grieves?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Forget not that⁠—far off⁠—Orestes lives.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Oh, bravely spoke! Thou counsellest not in vain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Next; on the sinners pray, their sin made plain⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Pray what? I know not. Oh, make clear my road!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Pray that there come to them or man or god⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A judge? Or an avenger? Speak thy prayer.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Plain be thy word: one who shall slay the slayer.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But dare I? Is it no sin thus to pray?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How else? With hate thine hater to repay. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</b> mounts upon the Grave Mound and makes sacrifice.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Herald most high of living and of dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou midnight Hermês, hear; and call the dread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spirits who dwell below the Earth, my vows</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To hearken and to watch my father’s house;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Earth our Mother, who doth all things breed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And nurse, and takes again to her their seed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I too with thee, as I pour these streams</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To wash dead hands, will call him in his dreams:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Father, pity me; pity thine own</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orestes, and restore us to thy throne;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We are lost, we are sold like slaves: and in our stead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lo, she hath brought thy murderer to her bed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aigisthos. I am like one chained alway;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orestes wandering without house or stay;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But they are full of pride, and make turmoil</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And banquet of the treasures of thy toil.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Guide thou Orestes homeward, let there be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some chance to aid him:⁠—Father, hark to me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, oh, give me a heart to understand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More than my mother, and a cleaner hand!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These prayers for us; but for our enemies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This also I speak: O Father, let there rise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Against them thine Avenger, and again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The slayer in just recompense be slain.⁠—</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Behold, I pray great evil, and I lay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These tokens down; yea, midmost as I pray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Against thine enemies I lay them⁠—so.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do thou to us send blessing from below</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With Zeus, and Earth, and Right which conquereth all.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>These be the prayers on which mine offerings fall.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do ye set lamentation like a wreath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Round them, and cry the triumph-song of death. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She proceeds with the pouring of offerings and presently finds on the tomb the Lock of Hair. The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b> makes lamentation before the grave.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>Let fall the tear that plashes as it dies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Where the dead lies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Fall on this barrèd door,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where Good nor Evil entereth any more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">This holy, abhorrèd thing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We turn from, praying.⁠—Lo, the milk and wine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are poured. Awake and hear, thou awful King;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hear in thy darkened soul, O Master mine!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span class="i1">Oh, for some man of might</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To aid this land, some high and visible lord</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Of battle, shining bright</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Against Death; the great lance</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Bearing deliverance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The back-bent Scythian bow, the hilted sword</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Close-held to smite and smite!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Excitedly returning from the Grave.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Behold, The offerings of the dust are ministered:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But counsel me. I bear another word.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Speak on. My spirit leaps for eagerness.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Cast on the tomb I found this shaven tress.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who cast it there? What man or zonèd maid?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Methinks that is a riddle quickly read!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy thought is swift; and may thine elder know?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What head save mine would blazon thus its woe?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>She that should mourn him is his enemy.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Musing, to herself.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Strange bird, but of one feather to mine eye⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>With what? Oh, speak. Make thy comparison.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Look; think ye not ’tis wondrous like mine own?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy brother’s!⁠ ⁠… Sent in secret! Can it be?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis like his long locks in my memory.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Orestes! Would he dare to walk this land?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Belike he sent it by another’s hand!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That calls for tears no less, if never more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His footstep may be set on Argos shore.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>At my heart also bitterer than gall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A great wave beats. The iron hath passed thro’ all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My being; and the stormy drops that rise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Full unforbidden from these starvèd eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gazing upon this hair. ’Tis past belief</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That any Argive tree hath shed this leaf.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sure she shore it not who wrought his death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My mother, godless, with no mother’s faith</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or kindness for her child.⁠—And yet to swear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Outright that this glad laugher is the hair</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of my beloved Orestes.⁠ ⁠… Oh, I am weak</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With dreaming! Had it but a voice to speak</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like some kind messenger, I had not been</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This phantom tossing in the wind between</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Two fancies. Either quick it would proclaim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Its hate, if from some hater’s head it came;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or, if it were our own, with me ’twould shed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tears for this tomb and our great father dead⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Surely they know, these gods to whom we pray,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through what wild seas our vessel beats her way,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, if to save us is their will, may breed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A mighty oak-trunk from a little seed⁠ ⁠… <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She goes back to the Tomb, searching.</i></span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Ah see, the print of feet, a second sign!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The same feet: surely they are shaped like mine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Surely! Two separate trails of feet are there:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He and perchance some fellow traveller.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The heels; the mark of the long muscle thrown</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Athwart them on the sand⁠—just like mine own</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In shape and measure. What?⁠ ⁠… Oh, all is vain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Torment of heart and blinding of the brain! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She buries her face in her hands. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> rises from his hiding-place and stands before her.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy prayer hath borne its fruit. Hereafter tell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gods thy thanks, and may the end be well!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What meanest thou? What hath God done for me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Shown thee a face which thou hast longed to see.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What face? What know’st thou of my secret heart?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Orestes’. For that name all fire thou art.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If that be so, how am I near mine end?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Here am I, Sister. Seek no closer friend.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Stranger! It is a plot thou lay’st for me!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Against mine own dear life that plot would be.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou mock’st me! Thou would’st laugh to hear me moan!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who mocks thy tribulation mocks mine own.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My heart half dares foretell that thou art he⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, when I face thee plain thou wilt not see!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh, seeing but that shorn tress of funeral hair</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy soul took wings and seemed to hold me there;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then peering in my steps⁠ ⁠… thou knew’st them mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy brother’s, moulded feet and head like thine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Set the lock here, where it was cut. Behold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This cloak I wear, thy woven work of old,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The battened ridges and the broidered braid Of lions⁠ ⁠… <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</b> throws herself into his arms.</i> Hold! Ah, be not all dismayed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With joy! Our nearest is our deadliest foe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O best beloved, O dreamed of long ago,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seed of deliverance washed with tears as rain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By thine own valour thou shalt build again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our father’s House! O lightener of mine eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Four places in my heart, four sanctities,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are thine. My father in thy face and mien</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet living: thine the love that might have been</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My mother’s⁠—whom I hate, most righteously⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And my poor sister’s, fiercely doomed to die,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou my faithful brother, who alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast cared for me.⁠ ⁠… O Victory, be our own</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This day, with Justice who doth hold us fast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Zeus most high, who saveth at the last!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O Zeus, O Zeus, look down on our estate!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast seen thine eagle’s brood left desolate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The father in the fell toils overborne</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of some foul serpent, and the young forlorn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And starved with famine, still too weak of wing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bear to the nest their father’s harvesting?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Even so am I, O Zeus, and even so</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This woman, both disfathered long ago,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both to one exile cast, both desolate.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He was thy worshipper, thy giver great</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of sacrifice. If thou tear down his nest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What hand like his shall glorify thy feast?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blot out the eagle’s brood, and where again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast thou thy messenger to speak to men?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blast this most royal oak, what shade shall cool</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thine altars on the death-day of the Bull?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But cherish us, and from a little seed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou shalt make great a House now fallen indeed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O Children, Saviours of your father’s House,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be silent! Children, all is perilous;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And whoso hears may idly speak of ye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To our masters; whom may I yet live to see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dead where the pine logs ooze in fragrant fire!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He speaks with increasing horror as he proceeds.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Oh, Loxias shall not mock my great desire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who spoke his divine promise, charging me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To thread this peril to the extremity:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, raised his awful voice and surging told</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To my hot heart of horrors stormy-cold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till I seek out those murderers, by the road</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Themselves have shown⁠—so spake he⁠—blood for blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In gold-rejecting rage, the wild bull’s way!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If not, for their offending I must pay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With mine own life, in torment manifold.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of many things that rise from earth he told,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To appease the angry dead: yea, and strange forms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On thee and me, of savage-fangèd worms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Climbing the flesh; lichens, which eat away</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even unto nothingness our natural clay.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when they leave him, a man’s hair is white.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For him that disobeys, he said, the night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath Furies, shapen of his father’s blood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clear-seen, with eyeball straining through the hood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of darkness. The blind arrows of dead men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who cried their kin for mercy and were slain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And madness, and wild fear out of the night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall spur him, rack him, till from all men’s sight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alone he goes, out to the desert dim,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that bronze horror clanging after him!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>For such as he there is no mixing bowl,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No dear libation that binds soul to soul:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From every altar fire the unseen rage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Outbars him: none shall give him harbourage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor rest beneath one roof with such an one;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till, without worship, without love, alone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He crawls to his death, a carcase to the core</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through-rotted, and embalmed to suffer more. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Collecting himself.</i></span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>So spake he⁠ ⁠… God, and is one to believe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such oracles as these? Nay, though I give</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No credence, the deed now must needs be done.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many things of power work here as one:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The God’s command; grief for my father slain;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And mine own beggary urgeth me amain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That never shall these Argives, famed afar,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>High conquerors of Troy in joyous war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cower to⁠ ⁠… two women. For he bears, I know,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A woman’s heart.⁠ ⁠… If not, this day will show. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He kneels at the Grave: <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</b> kneels opposite him and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b> gather behind.</i></span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>Ye great Apportionments of God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The road of Righteousness make straight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">“For tongue of hate be tongue of hate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made perfect”: thus, as falls her rod,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God’s justice crieth: “For the blow</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Of death the blow of death atone.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">“On him that doeth shall be done”:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speaks a grey word of long ago.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">O Father, Father of Doom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">What word, what deed from me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Can waft afar to the silent room</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Where thy sleep holdeth thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">A light that shall rend thy gloom?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Yet surely, the tale is told,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">That tears are comfort beneath the tomb</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">To the great Kings of old.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i3">No fire ravening red,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">O Son, subdueth quite</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">The deep life of the dead;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">His wrath breaks from the night.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">When they weep for one who dies</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">His Avenger doth arise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Yea, for father and life-giver</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">There is Justice, when the cries</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">And the tears run as a river.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>O Father, hearken and save,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">For my sore sorrow’s sake!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Children twain are above thy grave</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Seeking for thee: Oh, wake!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy grave is their only home,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The beggared and out-cast.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What here is well? What is saved from doom?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">O Atê strong to the last!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">Yet still it may be⁠—God is strong⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">A changèd music shall be born</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">To sound above this dirge forlorn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And the King’s House with Triumph-song</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Lead home a Friend in love new-sworn.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 3</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i1">Would that in ancient days,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Father, some Lycian lance</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Had slain thee by Ilion’s wall;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Then hadst thou left great praise</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">In thy House, and thy children’s glance</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">In the streets were marked of all:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Men had upreared for thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">A high-piled burial hill</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">In a land beyond the sea;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">And the House could have borne its ill.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i1">And all they who nobly died</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Would have loved him in that place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And observed him in his pride</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">As he passed with royal pace</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">To a throne at the right hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Of the Kings of the Dark Land:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">For a king he was when living,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Above all who crownèd stand</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">With the sceptre of lawgiving.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 3</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i1">Nay, would thou hadst died not ever!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Not by the Ilian Gate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Not when the others fell</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Spear-broken beside the river!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">If they who wrought thee hate</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Had died, it had all been well:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">A strange death, full of fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">That the folk beyond far seas</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Should enquire thereof, and hear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Not of our miseries!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">My daughter, rare as gold is rare,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">And blither than the skies behind</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">The raging of the northern wind</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Are these thy prayers: for what is prayer?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Yet, be thou sure, this twofold scourge</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Is heard: it pierceth to the verge</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Of darkness, and your helpers now</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Are wakening. These encharioted</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Above us, lo, their hand is red!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Abhorrèd are they by the dead;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">But none so hates as he and thou!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 4</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i3">Ah me, that word, that word</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Stabbeth my heart, as a sword!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">God, God, who sendest from below</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Blind vengeance in the wake</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Of sin, what deed have I to do,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">With hand most weak and full of woe?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">’Tis for my father’s sake!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 5</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">May it be mine, may it be mine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">To dance about the blazing pine</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Crying, crying,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">“A man is slain, a woman dying!”</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">It hideth in my bosom’s core,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">It beats its wings for death, for death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">A bitter wind that blows before</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">The prow, a hate that festereth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">A thing of horror, yet divine!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 4</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i3">Zeus of the orphan, when</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Wilt lift thy hand among men?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Let the land have a sign. Be strong,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">And smite the neck from the head.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">I ask for right after much wrong.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Hear me, O God! Hark to my song,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Ye Princedoms of the Dead!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i2">’Tis written: the shed drop doth crave</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">For new blood. Yea, the murdered cry</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Of dead men shrieketh from the grave</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">To Her who out of sins gone by</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Makes new sin, that the old may die.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 6</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i3">How? Are ye dumb, Ye Princedoms of the Dead?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">O Curses of Them that perish, come hither, hither!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Look on this wreck of kings, the beaten head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Bowed in despair, roofless, disherited!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Whither to turn, O Lord Zeus? Whither, whither?</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 5</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">My heart, my heart is tossed again</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">To see thee yielded up to pain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Failing, failing;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Then mist is on my eyes and wailing</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">About mine ears, and tears as rain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">But when once more I look on thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">With power exalted, sudden-swift</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">A hope doth all my burden lift,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">And light, and signs of things to be.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 6</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>What best shall pierce thine ear; the wrongs she wrought,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Wrought upon us, upon us, she and none other?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh, fawn and smile: but the wrongs shall soften not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wrongs with a wolfish heart, by a wolf begot:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">They see no smile, they reck not the name of Mother!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 7</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>With the dirge of Agbatana I beat my breast:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Like the Keeners of Kissia, I make songs of pain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, yearning of arms abundant, east and west:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Tearing they smite, again and yet again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From above, from high; yea, God hath smitten red</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This bitter bleeding bosom, this bended head.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 8</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i3">Ho, Mother! Ho, thou, Mother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Mine enemy, daring all!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">What burial made ye here?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">His people followed not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Mourned him not, knew him not:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Enemies bare his pall:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">His wife shed no tear!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 9</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>All, all dishonour, so thy story telleth it!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And for that dishonour shall the woman pay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As the gods have willed it, as my right hand willeth it!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Then Death may take me, let me only slay!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 9</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>His hands and feet, they were hacked away from him!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Yea, she that buried him, she wrought it so.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make thy life blasted, without help or stay from him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Thou hast it all, the defiling and shame and woe! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> breaks down in speechless tears.</i></span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 7</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Thou tellest the doom he died, but I saw him not;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">I was far off, dishonoured and nothing worth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like a dog they drove me back, and the door was shut,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And alone I poured my tears to him through the earth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I laughed not, yet rejoiced that none saw me weep.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Write this in thine heart, O Father; grave it deep.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 8</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Write! Yea, and draw the word</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Deep unto that still land</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Where thy soul dwells in peace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">What is, thou hast this day heard;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">What shall be, reach forth thine hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">And take it! Be hard, be hard</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">To smite and not cease!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</b>, and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 10</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Thee, thee I call. Father, be near thine own.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">I also cry thee, choked with the tears that flow.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>Yea, all this band, it crieth to thee as one.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>O great King, hear us. Awake thee to the sun.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Be with us against thy foe!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 10</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>The slayer shall meet the slayer, wrong smite with wrong.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">O Zeus, bless thou the murder to be this day.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>(Dost hear? Oh, fear is upon me and trembling strong.)</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>The day of Fate is old, it hath lingered long;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">It cometh to them that pray.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Divers Women</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 11</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>—Alas, alas, for the travail born in the race,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">—Alas for the harp of Atê, whose strings run blood,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">—The beaten bosom, the grief too wild to bear.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">—The pain that gnaweth, and will not sink to sleep.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 11</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>—The House hath healing for its own bitterness;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">—It is here within. None other can stay the flood;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">—Through bitter striving, through hate and old despair.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">—Behold the Song of the Daemons of the deep!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O Father mine, O most unkingly slain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grant me the lordship of thy House again.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A boon for me likewise, O Father, give;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To lay Aigisthos in his blood and live.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So men shall honour thee with wassail high;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Else without meat or incense shalt thou lie,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unhonoured when the dead their banquets call.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And I will pour thee offerings wondrous fair</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From my stored riches for a marriage-prayer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And this thy grave will honour more than all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Send back, O Earth, my sire to comfort me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In power, in beauty, Great Persephone!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Remember, Father, how they laved thee there!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Remember the strange weaving thou didst wear!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A snarèd beast in chains no anvil wrought!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In coilèd webs of shame and evil thought!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Scorn upon scorn! Oh, art thou wakenèd?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dost rear to sunlight that belovèd head?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Or send thine helping Vengeance to the light</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To aid the faithful: or let even fight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be joined in the same grapple as of yore,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If, conquered, thou wouldst quell thy conqueror.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yet one last cry: O Father, hear and save!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pity thy children cast upon thy grave:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The woman pity, and the weeping man.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And blot not out the old race that began</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With Pelops: and though slain thou art not dead!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Children are living voices for a head</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Long silent, floats which hold the net and keep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The twisted line unfoundered in the deep.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Listen: ’tis thou we weep for, none but thou:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thyself art savèd if thou save us now.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Behold, ye have made a long and yearning praise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This sepulchre for unlamented days</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Requiting to the full. And for the rest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seeing now thine heart is lifted on the crest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of courage, get thee to the deed, and see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What power the Daemon hath which guardeth thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So be it. Yet methinks to know one thing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were well. Why sent she this drink-offering?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hoped she by late atonement to undo</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That wrong eternal? A vain comfort, too,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sent to one dead, and feeling not! My mind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stumbles to understand what lies behind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These gifts, so puny for the deed she hath done.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, though man offer all he hath to atone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For one life’s blood, ’tis written, he hath lost</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That labour.⁠—But enough. Say all thou know’st.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Son, I was near her, and could mark aright.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A dream, a terror wandering in the night,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shook her dark spirit till she spoke that word.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What was the dream she dreamed? Speak, if ye heard.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>She bore to life, she said, a Serpent Thing.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And after? To its head thy story bring.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In swathing clothes she lapt it like a child.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It craved for meat, that dragon of the wild?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes; in the dream she gave it her own breast.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And took no scathing from the evil beast?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The milk ran into blood. So deep it bit.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The dream is come. The man shall follow it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And she, appalled, came shrieking out of sleep;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And many a torch, long blinded in the deep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of darkness, in our chambers burst afire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To cheer the Queen. Then spake she her desire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To send, as a swift medicine for the dread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That held her, these peace offerings to the dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Behold, I pray this everlasting Earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I pray my father’s grave, they bring to birth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In fullness all this dream. And here am I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To read its heart and message flawlessly.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seeing that this serpent, born whence I was born,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wore the same swathing-bands these limbs had worn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fanged the same breast that suckled me of yore,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And through the sweet milk drew that gout of gore;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And seeing she understood, and sore afeared</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shrieked: therefore it must be that, having reared</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A birth most ghastly, she in wrath shall die:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I, the beast, the serpent, even I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall slay her! Be it so. The dream speaks clear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I take thyself for mine interpreter,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And pray that this may be. But speak thy will</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who shall be doing, say, and who be still?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis simply told. This woman makes her way</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Within, and ye my charges shall obey,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That they who slew by guile a man most rare,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By guile, and snarèd in the self-same snare,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May die, as Lord Apollo hath foretold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Loxias the Seer, who never failed of old.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>First, I array me in a stranger’s guise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all the gear of travel, and likewise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This man⁠—their guest and battle-guest of yore!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then hither shall we come, and stand before</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The courtyard gate, and call. Aye, we will teach</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our tongues an accent of Parnassian speech,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like men in Phôkis born. And say, perchance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>None of the warders with glad countenance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will ope to us, the House being so beset</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With evil: aye, what then? Then obdurate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We shall wait on, till all who pass that way</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall make surmise against the House, and say</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“What ails Aigisthos? Wherefore doth he close</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His door against the traveller, if he knows</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And is within?” So comes it, soon or late,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I cross the threshold of the courtyard gate;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And entering find him on my father’s throne.⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or, say he is abroad and comes anon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hears, and calls for me⁠—and there am I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before him, face to face and eye to eye;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Whence comes the traveller?” ere he speaks it, dead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I lay him, huddled round this leaping blade!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then shall the Curse have drunken of our gore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her third, last, burning cup, and thirst no more.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span>Therefore go thou within, and watch withal</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That all this chance may well and aptly fall.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For you, I charge ye of your lips take heed:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Good words or silence, as the hour may need.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While One Below his counsel shall afford</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ope to me the strait way of the sword. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pylades</b> depart, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</b> goes into the House.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i1">Host on host, breedeth Earth</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Things of fear and ghastly birth;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Arm on arm spreads the Sea</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">That full of coilèd horrors be;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And fires the sky doth multiply;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And things that crawl, and things that fly,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And they that are born in the wind can tell of the perils</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Of tempest and the Wrath on high.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i1">But, ah, the surge over-bold</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Of man’s passion who hath told?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Who the Love, wild as hate,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">In woman’s bosom desperate,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Which feedeth in the fields of Woe?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Where lives of mortals linkèd go</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The heart of a woman is perilous past all perils</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Of stars above or deeps below.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Wist ye not, O light of mind,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Her who slew her son with hate,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Thestios’ daughter desolate,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">How she wrought All her thought</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To one counsel, fiery-blind,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">When she burned the brand of fate,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">That was twin to him and brother</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">From the hour of that first cry</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">When the babe came from the mother</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Till the strong man turned to die?</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Wist ye not one loathed of old,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Who to win a foe did sell,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Cruel, him who loved her well;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Skylla, dyed with blood and pride,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Who craved the rings of Cretan gold</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">That Minos gave, too rich to tell;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Like a wolf at night she came</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Where he lay with tranquil breath,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And she cut the Crest of Flame:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And, a-sudden, all was death.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">But o’er all terrors on man’s tongue</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">The woman’s deed of Lemnos lies;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">It echoes, like an evil song,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Far off, and whensoe’er there rise</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">New and strange sins, in dire surmise,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Men mind them of the Lemnian wrong.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Yet surely by the Sin God’s eye</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Abhorreth, mortal man shall die,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And all the glory that was his.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">For who shall lift that thing on high</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Which God abaseth? Not amiss</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">I garner to my crown of woe</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">These sins of Woman long ago.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">O lust so old, so hard of heart!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">I lose me in the stories told,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Untimely. Have these walls no part</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">In ravening of desire, as bold</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And evil as those deeds of old?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The House with dread thereof doth start</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">From dreaming. On, through woe or weal</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">A woman brooding planned her path,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Against a warrior robed in steel,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And armies trembled at his wrath.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And he is gone; and we must kneel</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">On a cold hearth and bow in fear</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Before a woman’s trembling spear.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 4</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Lo, the sword hovereth at the throat</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">For Justice’ sake. It scorneth not</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">What the proud man to earth has trod.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Its edge is bitter to the bone;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">It stabbeth on, thro’ iron, thro’ stone,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Till it reach him who hath forgot</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">That Ruth which is the law of God.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 4</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">For Justice is an oak that yet</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Standeth; and Doom the Smith doth whet</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">His blade in the dark. But what is this?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">A child led to the House from lands</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Far off, and blood upon his hands!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The great Erinys wreaks her debt,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Whose thought is as the vast abyss.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>The scene now represents the front of the Palace of the Atridae, with one door leading to the main palace, another to the Women’s House. Dusk is approaching. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pylades</b>, disguised as merchants from Phôkis, with Attendants.</i></p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ho, Warder! Hear! One knocketh at your gate!⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ho, Warder, yet again! I knock and wait.⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A third time, ye within! I call ye forth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or counts your lord the stranger nothing worth?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">A Porter</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Within, opening the main door.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Enough! I hear. What stranger and wherefrom?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go, rouse your masters. ’Tis to them I come,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bearing great news. And haste, for even now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Night’s darkling chariot presseth to the brow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of heaven, and wayfarers like us must find</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quick anchorage in some resthouse for our kind.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let one come forth who bears authority;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A woman, if God will; but if it be</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A man, ’twere seemlier. With a woman, speech</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Trembles and words are blinded. Man can teach</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Man all his purpose and make clear his thought. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</b> from the House.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Strangers, your pleasure? If ye have need of aught</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All that beseems this House is yours to-day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Warm bathing and the couch that soothes away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Toil, and the tendering of righteous eyes.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Else, if ye come on some grave enterprise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That is man’s work; and I will find the man.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I come from Phôkis, of the Daulian clan,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, travelling hither, bearing mine own load</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of merchandise, toward Argos, as the road</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Branched, there was one who met me, both of us</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Strangers to one another: Strophius,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A Phocian prince, men called him. On we strode</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Together, till he asked me of my road</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And prayed me thus: “Stranger, since other care</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Takes thee to Argos, prithee find me there</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The kin of one Orestes.⁠ ⁠… Plainly said</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is best remembered: tell them he is dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forget not. And howe’er their choice may run,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bear his ashes home, or leave their son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In a strange grave, in death an exile still,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Discover, and bring back to me their will.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tell them his ashes lie with me, inurned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In a great jar of bronze, and richly mourned.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So much I tell you straight, being all I heard.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Howbeit, I know not if I speak my word</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To the right hearers, princes of this old</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Castle. Methinks his father should be told.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So cometh the last wreck in spite of all!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Curse of this House, thou foe that fear’st no fall,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How dost thou spy my hidden things and mar</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their peace with keen-eyed arrows from afar,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till all who might have loved me, all, are gone!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now Orestes; whom I had thought upon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So wisely, walking in free ways, his gait</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unsnarèd in this poison-marsh of hate!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The one last hope, the healing and the prayer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of this old House, ’twas writ on empty air!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>For me, in a great House and favoured thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By fortune, ’tis by tidings prosperous</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I fain were known and welcomed. Pleasantest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all ties is the tie of host and guest.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But my heart told me ’twere a faithless thing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To fail a comrade in accomplishing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His charge, when I had pledged both word and hand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not for our sorrow shall thy portion stand</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lowlier, nor thyself be less our friend.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Another would have told us; and the end</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is all one. But ’tis time that strangers who</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have spent long hours in travel should have due</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Refreshment. Ho, there! Lead him to our broad</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Guest-chambers, and these comrades of his road</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who follow. See they find all comfort there</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To assuage their way-worn bodies. And have care</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That in their tendance naught be found amiss.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ourselves shall with our Lord consult of this</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Distress, and, having yet good friends, who know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My heart, take counsel how to affront the blow. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</b> goes back into the Women’s House; Attendants lead <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> and his followers through the main door.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Ye handmaidens, arise, be bold:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">See if our moving lips have power</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">To aid Orestes in his hour;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">For sure ye loved this House of old.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i1">Thou holy Earth, thou holy shore</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Beyond the grave, where rests his head</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">The Lord of Ships, the King, the Dead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Now list, now aid, or never more!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The hour is full. The Guileful Word</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Descends to wrestle for the right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">And Hermês guards the hour of night</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">For him that smiteth with the sword. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</b> enters from the Women’s House, weeping.</i></span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The stranger works some mischief, it would seem!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yonder I see Orestes’ Nurse, a-stream</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With tears.⁠—How now, Kilissa, whither bound,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And Grief the unbidden partner of thy round?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The mistress bids me call Aigisthos here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Quickly, to see these two, and learn more clear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As man from man, the truth of what they tell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh, to us slaves she makes it pitiable</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And grievous, and keeps hid behind her eyes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The leaping laughter. Aye, ’tis a rich prize</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For her, and for the House stark misery,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This news the travellers tell so trippingly.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, Oh, Aigisthos, he, you may be sure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will laugh to hear it!⁠ ⁠… Ah, I am a poor</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Old woman! Such a tangle as they were,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The troubles in this House, and hard to bear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Long years back, and all aching in my breast!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But none that hurt like this! Through all the rest⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Well, I was sore, but lived them down and smiled.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But little Orestes, my heart’s care, the child</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I took straight from his mother; and save me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He had no other nurse! And, Oh, but he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could scream and order me to tramp the dark!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aye, times enough, and trouble enough, and stark</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wasted at that! A small thing at the breast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That has no sense, you tend it like a beast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By guesswork. For he never speaks, not he,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A babe in swaddling clothes, if thirst maybe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or hunger comes, or any natural need.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The little belly takes its way. Indeed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twas oft a prophet he wanted, not a nurse;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And often enough my prophecies, of course,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came late, and then ’twas clothes to wash and dry,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fuller’s work as much as nurse’s. Aye,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I followed both trades, from the day when first</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His father gave me Orestes to be nursed.⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now he is dead; and strangers come and tell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The news to me. And this poor miserable</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Old woman must go tell the plunderer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who shames this house! Oh, glad he will be to hear!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How doth she bid him come? In what array?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I take thee not.⁠ ⁠… What is it ye would say?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Comes he with spears to guard him or alone?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>She bids him bring the spearmen of the throne.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Speak not that bidding to our loathèd Lord!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Alone, quick, fearing nothing” is the word.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So speak, and in thy heart let joy prevail!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The teller straighteneth many a crookèd tale.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What ails thee? Are these tidings to thy mind?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The wind is cold, but Zeus may change the wind.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How, when Orestes, our one hope, is dead?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not yet! So much the dullest seer can read.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What mean’st thou? There is something ye have heard!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go, tell thy tale. Obey thy mistress’ word!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God, where He guardeth, guardeth faithfully.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I go.⁠—May all be well, God helping me! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nurse</b> goes out.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span class="i3">—Lo, I pray God, this day:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Father of Olympus, hear!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Grant thy fortunes healingly</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Fall for them who crave to see</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">In this House of lust and fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">Purity, purity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">—I have sinned not, I have spoken</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">In the name of Law unbroken;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Zeus, as thou art just, we pray thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Be his guard!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">There is One within the Gate</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of his foemen, where they wait;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Oh, prefer him, Zeus, before them</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And exalt and make him great:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Two- and threefold shall he pay thee</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Love’s reward.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i3">—Seest thou one lost, alone,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Child of him who loved thee well?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">As a young steed he doth go,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Maddened, in the yoke of woe:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Oh, set measure on the swell,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Forth and fro, forth and fro,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of the beating hoofs that bear him</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Through this bitter course. Oh, spare him!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">By his innocence we pray thee</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Be his guard!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">There is One within the Gate</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of his foemen, where they wait;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Oh, prefer him, Zeus, before them</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And exalt and make him great:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Two- and threefold shall he pay thee</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Love’s reward.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>—Gods of the treasure-house within,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">One-hearted, where the bronzen door</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">On darkness gloateth and on gold:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">With present cleansing wash the old</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Blight of this house: and aged Sin</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Amid the gloom shall breed no more!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<p>
										<span>And, O light of the Great Cavern, let it be</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That this Man’s house look up again, and see,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Till the dead veil of scorn</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And long darkness shall be torn,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And the kind faces shine and old Argolis be free!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i1">—And, Oh, let Hermês, Maia-born,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Be near, who moveth in his kind,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">As the wind blows, to help at need:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">The word he speaketh none may read:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Before his eyes the Day is torn</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">With darkness and the Night is blind.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<p>
										<span>And, O Light of the Great Cavern, let it be</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That this Man’s house look up again, and see,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Till the dead veil of scorn</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And long darkness shall be torn,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And the kind faces shine and old Argolis be free!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">—Then, then the prison shall unclose:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">A wind of Freedom stream above:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">A flood which faileth not, a voice</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Telling of women that rejoice,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">One harp in many souls, one spell</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Enchanted. Ho, the ship goes well!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">For me, for me, this glory grows,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And Evil flies from those I love.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Oh, in courage and in power,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">When the deed comes and the hour,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">As she crieth to thee “Son”</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Let thy “Father” quell her breath!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">But a stroke and it is done,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">The unblamèd deed of death.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 3</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i1">—The heart of Perseus, darkly strong,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Be lifted in thy breast to-day:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">For them thou lovest in the grave,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">For them on Earth, be blind, be brave:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Uphold the cloak before thine eyes</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And see not while thy Gorgon dies;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">But him who sowed the seed of wrong,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Go, look him in the face and slay!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Oh, in courage and in power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">When the deed comes and the hour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">As she crieth to thee “Son,”</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Let thy “Father” quell her breath!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">But a stroke and it is done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">The unblamèd deed of death. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter from the country <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aigisthos</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aigisthos</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A message called me; else I scarce had thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To have come so quick. ’Tis a strange rumour, brought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They tell me, by some Phocian wayfarers</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In passing: strange, nor grateful to our ears.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orestes dead! A galling load it were</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And dripping blood for this poor House to bear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Still scored and festerous with its ancient wound.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How shall I deem it? Living truth and sound?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or tales of women, born to terrify,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That wildly leap, and up in mid-air die?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What know ye further? I would have this clear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We heard the tale; but go within and hear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With thine own ears. A rumoured word hath weak</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Force, when the man himself is there to speak.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aigisthos</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hear him I will, and question him beside.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was this man with Orestes when he died,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or speaks he too from rumour? If he lies⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He cannot cheat a mind that is all eyes. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He enters the House.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Zeus, Zeus, how shall I speak, and how</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Begin to pray thee and beseech?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">How shall I ever mate with speech</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">This longing, and obtain my vow?</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">The edges of the blades that slay</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Creep forth to battle: shall it be</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Death, death for all eternity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">On Agamemnon’s House this day;</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Or sudden a new light of morn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">A beacon fire for freedom won,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">The old sweet rule from sire to son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">And golden Argolis reborn?</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Against two conquerors all alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">His last death-grapple, deep in blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Orestes joineth.⁠ ⁠… O great God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Give victory! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Death-cry of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aigisthos</b> within.</i> Ha! The deed is done!</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How? What is wrought? Stand further from the door</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till all is over. Move apart before</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men mark, and deem us sharers in the strife.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For after this ’tis war, for death or life. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The Women stand back almost unseen. A Household <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Slave</b> rushes out from the main Door, and beats at the door of the Women’s House.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Slave</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ho!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Treason! Our master! Treason! Haste amain!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Treason within. Aigisthos lieth slain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unbar, unbar, with all the speed ye may</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The women’s gates! Oh, tear the bolts away!⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>God, but it needs a man, a lusty one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To help us, when all time for help is gone!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What ho!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I babble to deaf men, and labouring cry,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To ears sleep-charmèd, words that fail and die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where art thou, Clytemnestra? What dost thou?⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Fore God, ’tis like to be her own neck now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In time’s revenge, that shivers to its fate. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What wouldst thou? Why this clamour at our gate?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Slave</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The dead are risen, and he that liveth slain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Woe’s me! The riddle of thy speech is plain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By treason we shall die, even as we slew.⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ho, there, mine axe of battle! Let us try</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who conquereth and who falleth, he or I!⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To that meseemeth we are come, we two. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter from the House <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> with drawn sword.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis thou I seek. With him my work is done.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Suddenly failing.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Woe’s me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Aigisthos, my beloved, my gallant one!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou lovest him! Go then and lay thine head</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beside him. Thou shalt not betray the dead. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Makes as if to stab her.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hold, O my son! My child, dost thou not fear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To strike this breast? Hast thou not slumbered here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy gums draining the milk that I did give?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Lowering his sword.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pylades!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What can I? Dare I let my mother live?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pylades</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where is God’s voice from out the golden cloud</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At Pytho? Where the plighted troth we vowed?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Count all the world thy foe, save God on high.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will obey. Thou counsellest righteously.⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Follow! Upon his breast thou shalt expire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whom, living, thou didst hold above my sire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go, lie in his dead arms!⁠ ⁠… This was the thing</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou lovedst, loathing thine anointed King.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I nursed thee. I would fain grow old with thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Shall one who slew my father house with me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Child, if I sinned, Fate had her part therein.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then Fate is here, with the reward of sin.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou reck’st not of a Mother’s Curse, my child?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not hers who cast me out into the wild.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Cast out? I sent thee to a war-friend’s Hall.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A free man’s heir, ye sold me like a thrall.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If thou wast sold, where is the price I got?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The price!⁠ ⁠… For very shame I speak it not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Speak. But tell, too, thy father’s harlotries.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Judge not the toiler, thou who sitt’st at ease!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A woman starves with no man near, my son.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Her man’s toil wins her bread when he is gone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To kill thy mother, Child: is that thy will?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I kill thee not: thyself it is doth kill.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A mother hath her Watchers: think and quail!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How shall I ’scape my Father’s if I fail?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To herself.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Living, I cry for mercy to a tomb!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, from the grave my father speaks thy doom.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah God! The serpent that I bare and fed!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Surely of truth prophetic is the dread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That walketh among dreams. Most sinfully</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou slewest: now hath Sin her will of thee. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He drives <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</b> before him into the Palace. The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b> come forward again.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>For these twain also in their fall I weep.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet, seeing Orestes now through mire so deep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath climbed the crest, I can but pray this eye</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the Great House be not made blind and die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Judgment came in the end</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">To Troy and the Trojans’ lord,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">(O Vengeance, heavy to fall!)</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">There came upon Atreus’ Hall</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Lion and lion friend,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">A sword came and a sword.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">A walker in Pytho’s way</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">On the neck of her kings hath trod,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">A beggar and outcast, yea,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">But led by God.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Came He of the laughing lure,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">The guile and the secret blow,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">(O Vengeance, subtle to slay!)</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">But there held his hand that day</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The Daughter of Zeus, the pure,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Justice yclept below.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Justice they called her name,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">For where is a goodlier?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And her breath is a sword of flame</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">On the foes of her.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<div>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Cry, Ho for the perils fled,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">For the end of the long dismay!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Cry, Ho for peace and bread;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">For the Castle’s lifted head,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">For the two defilers dead,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And the winding of Fortune’s way!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Strophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Even as Apollo gave</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">His charge on the Mountain, He</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Who holdeth the Earth-heart Cave,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Hast thou wrought innocently</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Great evil, hindered long,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Tracking thy mother’s sin⁠ ⁠…</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Is the power of God hemmed in</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">So strangely to work with wrong?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Howbeit, let praise be given</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">To that which is throned in Heaven:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">The Gods are strong.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span class="i2">And soon shall the Perfect Hour</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">O’er the castle’s threshold stone</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Pass with his foot of power,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">When out to the dark is thrown</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The sin thereof and the stain</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">By waters that purify.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Now, now with a laughing eye</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">God’s fortune lieth plain;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And a cry on the wind is loud:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">“The stranger that held us bowed</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Is fallen again!”</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i2">O light of the dawn to be!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">The curb is broken in twain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">And the mouth of the House set free.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Up, O thou House, and see!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Too long on the face of thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">The dust hath lain! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The doors are thrown open, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> discovered standing over the dead bodies of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aigisthos</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</b>. The Household is grouped about him and Attendants hold the great red robe in which Agamemnon was murdered.</i></span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He speaks with ever-increasing excitement.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Behold your linkèd conquerors! Behold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Father’s foes, the spoilers of the fold!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh, lordly were these twain, when thronèd high,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lovely now, as he who sees them lie</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can read, two lovers faithful to their troth!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They vowed to slay my father, or that both</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As one should die, and both the vows were true!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And mark, all ye who hear this tale of rue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This robe, this trap that did my father greet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Irons of the hand and shackling of the feet!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Outstretch it north and south: cast wide for me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This man-entangler, that our Sire may see⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not mine, but He who watcheth all deeds done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, all my mother’s wickedness, the Sun⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bear me witness, when they seek some day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To judge me, that in justice I did slay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This woman: for of him I take no heed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He hath the adulterer’s doom, by law decreed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But she who planned this treason ’gainst her own</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Husband, whose child had lived beneath her zone⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh, child of love, now changed to hate and blood!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What is she? Asp or lamprey of the mud,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, fangless, rotteth with her touch, so dire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That heart’s corruption and that lust like fire?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Woman? Not woman, though I speak right fair. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">His eyes are caught by the great red robe.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>A dead man’s winding-sheet? A hunter’s snare?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A trap, a toil, a tangling of the feet.⁠ ⁠…</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I think a thief would get him this, a cheat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That robs the stranger. He would snare them so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And kill them, kill them, and his heart would glow.⁠ ⁠…</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not in my flesh, not in my house, O God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May this thing live! Ere that, Oh, lift thy rod</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And smiting blast me, dead without a child! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He stops exhausted.</i></span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i3">O deeds of anger and of pain!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">O woman miserably slain!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Alas! Alas!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">And he who lives shall grieve again.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Did she the deed or no? This robe defiled</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Doth bear me witness, where its web is gored,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How deep the dye was of Aigisthos’ sword;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And blood hath joined with the old years, to spoil</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The many tinctures of the broidered coil.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oh, now I weep, now praise him where he died,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And calling on this web that pierced his side.⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pain, pain is all my doing, all my fate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My race, and my begetting: and I hate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This victory that sears me like a brand.⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i3">No mortal thro’ this life shall go</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">For ever portionless of woe.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Alas! Alas!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">It comes to all, or swift or slow.</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yet wait: for I would have you understand.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The end I know not. But methinks I steer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unseeing, like some broken charioteer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By curbless visions borne. And at my heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A thing of terror knocketh, that will start</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sudden a-song, and she must dance to hear.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But while I am still not mad, I here declare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To all who love me, and confess, that I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have slain my mother, not unrighteously;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who with my father’s blood hath stained the sod</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Argos and drawn down the wrath of God.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the chief spell that wrought me to the deed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is Loxias, Lord of Pytho, who decreed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His high commandment: if this thing I dare,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He lays on me no sin: if I forbear⁠ ⁠…</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I cannot speak his judgment: none can know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The deeps thereof, no arrow from the bow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out-top it. Therefore here ye see me, how</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I go prepared, with wreaths and olive bough,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To kneel in supplication on the floor</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Loxias, touch the fire that evermore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Men call the undying, and the midmost stone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Earth, flying this blood which is mine own.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And how these evil things were wrought, I pray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All men of Argos on an after day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Remember, and bear witness faithfully</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When Meneläus comes.⁠ ⁠… And take from me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Living or dead, a wanderer and outcast</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ever, this one word, my last, my last.⁠ ⁠…</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, all is well. Leave no ill omen here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor bind upon thy lips the yoke of fear.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All Argos thou hast freed, and with one sweep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Two serpents’ heads hurled reeking to the deep.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Overcome with sudden terror.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah! Ah!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye bondmaids! They are here: like Gorgons, gowned</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In darkness; all bewreathed and interwound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With serpents!⁠ ⁠… I shall never rest again.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What fantasies, most father-loved of men,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Haunt thee? Be strong, thou conqueror! Have no fear!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>These are no fantasies. They are here; they are here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Hounds of my dead Mother, hot to kill.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The blood upon thine hand is reeking still:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For that the turmoil in thy heart is loud.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O Lord Apollo! More and more they crowd</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Close, and their eyes drip blood, most horrible!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>One cleansing hast thou. Loxias can quell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy tempest with his touch, and set thee free.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>You cannot see them. I alone can see.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am hunted.⁠ ⁠… I shall never rest again. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>—Farewell. May blessing guide thee among men.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>—May God with love watch over thee, and heed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy goings and be near thee at thy need.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i2">Behold a third great storm made wild</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">By winds of wrath within the race,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Hath shook this castle from its place.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">The ravin of the murdered child</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">First broke Thyestes in his pride:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Second, a warrior and a King,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Chief of Achaia’s warfaring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Was smitten in the bath and died.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">And Third, this Saviour or this last</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Doom from the deep. What end shall fall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i3">Or peace, or death outsweeping all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">When night comes and the Wrath is past? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
